Acoustics and physical models of bird sounds
Seppo Fagerlund
HUT, Laboratory of Acoustics and Audio Signal Processing
Seppo.Fagerlund@hut.fi
Abstract
For humans bird song is as natural phenomena as speech or human singing.
However organization and generation of bird song is not so well-known as
one for speech. In this paper we take short review to the basic stuctures of
sounds birds can produce and also to principles of sound producing mechanism
in birds. Birds have unique organ for sound production among all
animals in the world. Both organ itself and also sounds it can produce have
large diversity between different species. We also introduce how popular
speech and audio modelling methods can be used to model sound production
in birds.
1. INTRODUCTION
Birds and especially sound of birds are importatant for humans and to our culture. For
many people sound of birds is the sign for starting of the spring. Bird-watching is also
popular hobby in many countries. Birds can be heard even in big cities and there they
are one of the few reminders of the surrounding nature. Also many composers, poets and
writers have been inspired by the song of birds.
The primary sound source in birds is syrinx, which is a unique organ to birds (King
1989). Syrinx is located at the junction of the two primary bronchi and the trachea or
entirely in the trachea or in the bronchi. Syrinx resembles human vocal cords in function,
but it is very different in form. Also the vocal tract, whose main parts are trachea, larynx,
mouth and beak, interacts to the sound of birds (Nowicki 1987). The anatomy of the
syrinx and the avian vocal tract vary considerably among different orders of birds and
sometimes even in different families within the same order.
Stucture of bird song has large diversity. Typical song may contain components which
are pure sinusoidal, harmonic, nonharmonic, broadband and noisy in structure (Nowicki
1997). Sound is often modulated in amplitude or frequency or even both together
(coupled modulation) (Brackenbury 1989). Frequency range is relatively small, typically
fundamental frequency lies between 3 and 5 kHz. A well-established way to divide song
into four hierarchical levels is: elements or notes, syllables, phrases and song (Catchpole
& Slater 1995). Elements can be regarded as elementary building units in bird song (Anderson,
Dave & Margoliash 1996) whereas phrases and songs often contain individual and
regional variation. Duration of one syllable ranges from few to few hundred milliseconds.
1
Larynx
Mouth Beak
Lungs
Trachea
Syrinx
Bronchi
Figure 1: Parts and organization of avian sound producing mechanism.
The sound producing mechanism in birds resembles the one in humans. Exitation
signal in birds is produced by syrinx and vocal tract can be seen as a resonator tube that
modulates the signal from the syrinx. Elements of the bird song are acoustically distinct,
like notes in music, and they constitute a characteristic sequence. Therefore it is natural
to use methods used in speech and musical instrument modelling to model and synthetise
the sound of the birds. Digital waveguides are a popular method to model many kinds
of spatially distributed acoustical mechanisms and organs and it have also been used to
model sound production in birds (Kahrs & Avanzini 2001) (Smyth & Smith 2002).
2. SOUND PRODUCTION MECHANISM
Main parts of sound production mechanism in birds are lungs, bronchi, syrinx, trachea,
larynx, mouth and beak. Airflow from lungs travels through the bronchi to the syrinx,
which is the main source of sound. Sound from syrinx is then modulated by vocal tract,
which consist of the trachea, larynx, mouth and beak. In figure 1 is presented schematic
view of the mechanism. Dimensions of mechanism and parts of it varies considerably
among different species, but organization is rather uniform.
2
2.1. Syrinx
Syrinx (see Figure 2) is the most important and most extensively studied organ in the bird
sound production mechanism. Besides that the organ is important in sound production,
it have also provided valuable information to the taxonomy of birds because of distinction
between anatomy of the organ in different species. The German anatomist Müller
classified bird species by their syringeal anatomy already in 1878 (Müller 1878). Müller
limited his studies to Passeriformes, but Beddard (Beddard 1898) took a wider range in
his studies. Many later studies have confirmed the classification by Müller and Beddard.
Three different types of syrinx, namely tracheobronchial, tracheal and bronchial, can
be found according to distinction between tracheal and bronchial elements of syrinx and
topographical position of the main sound producing mechanism. When main sound production
mechanism is located in the bronchi it can be in different position in the two
bronchi. Tracheal elements are cartillage rings (see Figure 2), typically complete, in
direct continuation with trachea. Bronchial elements are paired incomplete C-shaped cartilage
rings with open ends against each other. Classification into these three classes is
however difficult task because intermediate forms are common.
Songbirds (order Passeriform suborder Passeri) are the largest group of the birds, they
cover about 4000 out of 9000 total number of birdspecies (Catchpole & Slater 1995).
Songbirds and the syrinx of songbirds are most extensively studied among all birds. The
syrinx of songbirds is complex in structure but relatively uniform in this group (King
1989) and it can be regarded as the prototype syrinx (Figure 2). The syrinx is located in
the junction of the trachea and two bronchi and therefore it belongs to the group of tracheobronchial
syrinx. When a bird is singing, airflow from lungs makes syringeal medial
tympaniform membrane (MTM) in each bronchi to vibrate through the Bernoulli effect
(Fletcher 1992). The membrane vibrates nonlinearly opposite to the cartilage wall. Voice
and motion of the membrane is controlled by a symmetrical pair of muscles surrounding
the syrinx. Membranes can vibrate independently to each other with different fundamental
frequencies and modes. Membranes are pressure controlled like a reed in woodwind
instruments, but membranes are blown open while the reed in the woodwind instruments
is blown closed.
In contrast to the MTM theory recent studies with endoscopic imaging have shown
that MTM would not be the main source of sound (Goller & Larsen 1997b). Goller
suggests that sound is produced by two soft tissues, medial and lateral labia (ML and LL
in Figure 2), similar to human vocal folds. Sound is produced by airflow passing through
two vibrating tissues. Further evidence to this comes from a study where MTM’s were
surgically removed (Goller & Larsen 2002). After removal birds were able to phonate
and sing almost normally. Small changes in song structure however were found, which
indicates that MTM’s have a function in sound production. However it is possible that
birds may be able to compensate the loss of MTM.
Also, because of large diversity in structure of avian syrinx and also in sounds, it is
possible that the MTM theory is correct for some species. For example Goller and Larsen
limited their study only to cardinals (Cardinalis cardinalis) and zebra finches (Taeniopygia
guttata). In contrast in (Gaunt, Gaunt & Casey 1982) ring doves (Streptoperia risoria)
were studied as evidence for the MTM theory. Furthermore in (Goller & Larsen 1997a) it
was found that the main source of sound in pigeons and doves is the tympaniform membrane.
However this membrane is located in the trachea and not in the bronchi.
3
?? ??
 
 
 
 
		

		

 
  
 
  


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
MTM
Cartillage
wall
Bronchus
Bronchus
Trachea
Bronchial
rings
Tracheal
rings
ML LL
Figure 2: Schematic view of songbird syrinx. According to classical theory sound is
produced by the vibrations of the medial tympaniform membrane (MTM) against the
cartilage wall. Recent studies suggests that sound is produced in similar way than in the
human vocal folds by the medial labia (ML) and the lateral labia (LL).
2.2. Trachea
The trachea in the birds is a tube between the syrinx and the larynx which acts as a resonator
to the sound produced by the syrinx. Elements of the tube are cartilage rings,
which are typically complete (McLelland 1989). The number of the tracheal cartilage
rings depends on the length of the neck and it ranges from about 30 in small passerines
to about 350 in long necked flamingos and cranes. However in the number of species the
trachea is arranged in loops or coils so that the length of the trachea is much longer than
the length of the neck. It have been argued that the tracheal loops improve transfer function
so that the trachea can transfer many frequencies (Gaunt, Gaunt, Prange & Wasser
1987). In some species the trachea is joined with air sacs or bulbous expansions. In some
penguins (Spheniscidae) and petrels (Procellariidae) the trachea is fragmented into two
channels. These speciespecific features are responsible for some characteristic sounds in
these species.
2.3. Larynx, mouth and beak
The larynx in the birds does not include vocal folds like in humans. Only few studies have
related to the larynx in the birds and its function to sound production is controversial. The
larynx seems to play only little or no role in sound production.
The mouth operates in birds as a cavity resonator like in humans. The mouth in birds
is however less flexible. With the tongue birds can control the cross-sectional area of the
mouth (Fletcher & Tarnopolsky 1999), but only few species can use the tongue for sound
4
production like humans (Patterson & Pepperberg 1994) because most of the birds have a
rather stiff tongue.
Analysis of the acoustical behaviour of the beak is a difficult task because form of the
beak is rather complex (Fletcher & Tarnopolsky 1999). The analysis can not be reduced
into one or two dimensions without losing vital information. Another difficulty with beak
acoustics is its highly dynamic nature. Beak opening and closing change acoustical properties
of the beak by changing dimensions of the gape. Recent studies suggest even bigger
role for the beak in sound production (Hoese, Podos, Boetticher & Nowicki 2000). Hoese
et al. shows that beak opening and closing changes the effective length of the vocal tract,
but effect to the vocal tract resonances is nonlinear. Birds can also change dimensions of
the vocal tract by movements of the head (Westneat, Long, Hoese & Nowicki 1993).
3. ORGANIZATION OF BIRD SOUNDS
Bird sounds are typically divided into two categories: songs and calls (Krebs &Kroodsma
1980) . Singing is limited to songbirds, but they cover only about half of the birds. Nonsongbirds
use also sounds to communicate and it is not less important than for songbirds
(Beckers, Suthers & ten Cate 2003). Generally songbird sounds are more complex and
they have a larger repertoire than non-songbirds, because the ability to control sound
production is better (Gaunt 1983).
Diversity of different sounds birds can produce is large. Characteristics of simple
voiced sounds are a fundamental frequency and its harmonics. Voiced sounds in birds
are closely related to the human vowel sounds in both structure and in a way they are
produced. However control of the vocal tract in birds is less complex than in humans. In
voiced sounds in birds fundamental frequency lies between
??
and
??	
in different
species. Birds can emphasize intensities of different harmonics with filtering properties
of the vocal tract. Birds can also produce pure tonal or whistled sounds that does not include
any harmonics. In both voiced and whistled cases sounds can be modulated in both
frequency and amplitude. Amplitude modulations of the fundamental element are mostly
generated by the syrinx (Beckers et al. 2003) but intensity differences between harmonics
is based on the properties of the vocal tract. Frequency modulation can be divided into
two categories: continuous frequency modulations and abrupt frequency jumps. Both frequency
modulations are source-generated (Beckers et al. 2003) (Fee, Shraiman, Pesaran
& Mitra 1998). In addition to these bird sounds can be also noisy, broadband or chaotic in
structure (Fletcher 2000). Characteristic of chaotic behaviour is unpredictability in future
waveform even though source and filter conditions are rather well-known. In figure 3 is
examples from songs and calls from different species and it illustrates diversity of sounds
birds can produce.
3.1. Two-Voice Theory
With two independently vibrating membranes in the syrinx, birds can in theory produce
two totally independent carrier waves. It have been suggested that this makes possible
to sing “internal duet”. Different species use two sound sources in sound production in
different manner. For example Canaries (Serinus canarius) use only one syringeal source
to sound production whereas Black-capped chickadees (Parus atricapillus) produce complex
call notes by using both sources (Nowicki 1997). Three different methods can be
found: sound can be produced by either membrane alone, by both acting together or by
5
Time
Frequency
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 104
Time
Frequency
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 104
Time
Frequency
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 104
Time
Frequency
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 104
Time
Frequency
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 104
Time
Frequency
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 104
Figure 3: Examples of bird sounds from different species. In upper row from left to
right Willow Warbler (Phylloscopus trochilus), Common Chaffinch (Fringilla coelebs)
and Hooded Crow (Corvus corone cornix). In lower row Arctic Warbler (Phylloscopus
borealis), Great Tit (Parus major) and Garden Warbler (Sylvia borin). The x and y-axis
in panels represent time in seconds and frequency in

, respectively.
switching sound source from one membrane to other (Suthers 1990). When both membranes
are active together they may generate same or different sound. It is also common
for some species that they use all three methods in sound production. First syllable from
call sound of great tit (Parus major) in the lower center panel in figure 3 represented in
figure 4 is a example from sound whose generation two sound sources were used.
3.2. Bird Songs
Generally songs are long and complex vocalization produced spontaneously by males. In
few species however also females sing and some species sing even duets. Female songs
tend to be simpler than song produced by males. Most species sing at certain time of
the year but birds have also a particular daily schedule when they sing. Best time for
observing bird singing is in the breeding season at spring. Some birds do not sing at
all during the rest of the year. Especially during the breeding season male bird song
has two main functions. One is to attract females and the other one is to repeal rival
males. However in some species song used to attract females tends to be longer and more
complex than song for territorial defence. Similar features and functions in female song
can be found than in male song.
During the day birds have biggest activity in singing at dawn. Several explanations to
this have been proposed. Feeding conditions are better after dawn and therefore birds have
more time to sing at dawn. It is also best time to take over vacant territories. Female birds
are most fertile at dawn and it is best time to copulate. For example it has been observed
that great tit (Parus major) males sing at dawn until female wakes and then copulates with
her (Mace 1987). One practical reason is also that conditions for sound transmission are
6
Figure 4: Call sound of Great Tit (Parus major). Some elements of the sound are not in
harmonic ratio.
favourable at dawn, because wind and air turbulence are reduced.
Transmission conditions are important otherwise also and those set limitations to the
structure of sound. Two fundamental phenomena that affect the transmition of sound are
attenuation and degredation, which is a problem especially in the dense environments.
Sound propagation properties are different in different environments and also at different
heights in a specific environment. Bird sounds adapt to environmental conditions so that
sound is transmitted to receiver optimally. Optimality condition depends on the function
of the sound and it does not always mean maximal distance.
Hierarchical levels of bird song are phrases, syllables and elements or notes. Elementary
building unit of bird song is called element, which is the smallest separable element
in spectrogram (see Figure 5). Elements are building blocks of syllables, that may be
produced by one or more elements or notes. The structure on syllables varies a lot and
therefore also the number of elements in syllables. Series of syllables that occur together
in a particular pattern is called a phrase. Syllables in a phrase are typically similar to
each other, but they can also be different like in the last phrase (end phrase) in figure 5.
A song is constructed of a series of phrases. When a bird changes the order or types of
the phrases in the songs the bird is said to have different types of songs and a repertoire
of song types. Repertoire size varies typically from few to several hundred song types in
different species.
3.3. Bird Calls
Bird calls are usually short and simply, but they can also be complex and can sometimes be
confused to the simple songs, especially when series of call sounds are connected. Calls
typically occur in specific context and carry some function and they are produced by both
7
Syllables Elements
Phrases
Figure 5: Hierarchical levels of common chaffinch (Fringilla coelebs) song. The y-axis
represents frequency in

and x-axis time in seconds.
sexes through the whole year. Calls have a large functionality and at least 10 different call
categories (e.g. alarm, flight and feeding call etc.) can be found. Furthermore some birds
have more than one call for one category and some use very similar calls for different
meaning. Call sounds are important for songbirds also and generally they have greater
repertoire of call sounds than non-songbirds.
4. PHYSICAL MODELS
Sound production models in birds were first studied by Greenewalt (Greenewalt 1968),
whose work has constituted the basis to the studies on the classical model of bird sounds.
A similar source-filter model can be used to model avian sounds than is used in speech or
wind instrument modeling. A difference to speech production is that birds may have two
independent sound sources in the syrinx. Sound from the syringeal source is then filtered
by the vocal tract. Two different models of avian sound production system are presented
in figure 6.
4.1. Models of sound source
In the classical model of the syrinx tympaniform membrane is assumed to be the main
source of oscillation. Vibration is driven by membrane’s natural frequency and air column
resonance in bronchi. Membrane motion against the cartilage wall changes the crosssection
area of bronchi causing a nonlinear change in pressure and air flow. The pressure
at tracheal side of the syrinx depends on pressure at the bronchial side of the syrinx
??
, air
density

, displacement of the membrane

, radius of the bronchus

and air flow through
syrinx

and is given in (Fletcher 1988) as
8
Presyringeal
bronchus
Presyringeal
bronchus
Syrinx
Syrinx
Postsyringeal
bronchus
Postsyringeal
bronchus
and beak
Larynx, mouth
Syrinx Trachea and beak
Larynx, mouth
Lung
Lung
Trachea
Bronchus
Lung Bronchus
Lung
Figure 6: Two models of avian vocal tract
???? ??     	
 ??  

 (1)
The airflow

from lungs varies in time as a bird is breathing. Membrane can be
modeled as a simple taut membrane, whose displacement can be calculated as function of
driving force against the membrane as:
 


 
 
   (2)
where is the mode frequency, is the damping coefficient, is the effective mass of the
membrane associated to the mode and
 
is position of the membrane at rest. Coefficient
is small constant term, which is referred to the coupling between and the mode. For
the driving force in (2) Fletcher gives
!  #" %$'&??  ?? ??       
)(*
(3)
where "is constant term order of unity.
The model is successful with voiced sounds but incapable to produce whistled or tonal
sounds. A one string model to model also tonal sounds was suggested in (Casey & Gaunt
1985). In this model the membranes in former model are stretched into the shape of
a string. The string model is capable to produce sound with one fundamental and its
harmonics. In (Doya & Sejnowski 1995) these two models were mixed so that the string
model produces tonal harmonic sounds and a mixture of sound from both models produce
noisy components.
As mentioned earlier, recent studies have suggested that the sound of birds is produced
by the tissue folds similar to the human vocal folds (Larsen & Goller 1999). Also recent
models of bird sound production have been build on models of the human vocal folds
(Gardner, Gecchi & Magnasco 2001). Gardner’s two-mass model is a simplification to
geometrical dimensions of the folds. In the model it is assumed that the folds are controlled
by bronchial pressure
?? 
. Averaged pressure at tracheal side of the folds can be
calculated as a function of bronchial pressure and position of the folds:
???? ??  ??+ -,/.0 (4)
where

and .are calculated in terms of phenomenological constant 1and position of the
center of the folds

as:
9
    1

(5)
.+.  1

(6)
Position of

can be calculated as given in (Laje, Gardner & Mindlin 2002):



 
. 
 .  
(7)
where

is the restitution constant, is the dissipation constant, .is the driving pressure
and 
is constant force term of the vibrating labia.
4.2. Models of vocal tract
Relatively little has been done on modeling of the bird vocal tract although its essential
role in sound production has been discovered for example in (Nowicki 1987) and (Brittan-
Powell, Dooling, Larsen & Heaton 1997). In (Fletcher & Tarnopolsky 1999) the acoustics
of the vocal tract of Oscine birds has been studied. Although Fletcher studies limits
only to song birds, models can be easily modified to correspond to many other birds. In
model both syringeal sound sources are first connected to the bronchial tube that leads to
the trachea. Both bronchi and trachea are modeled with an acoustical impedance matrix
whose coefficients can be calculated by
??

   	 
  (8)
??


??  	   (9)
where

is the air density,  is the speed of sound, 	 is the cross-sectional area of the
tube, is the length of the tube and
 , is the wavenumber.  is the
frequency in Hertz and  is the attenuation coefficient for sound propagating in tube. The
input impedance for the system that includes two bronchi and the trachea is given by
 "! $#?? # ??
#&??% ('

'??'

' # ??%  ??
 #


'

'??'

' ??
  #??'??'

' ??

(10)
where # and # %refer to the two bronchi and ' refers to the trachea.
Fletcher presents also a models for the larynx, mouth and beak. The larynx is modeled
by a simple series impedance )*,	, where is length and 	 is cross-sectional area
of the larynx. The mouth can be modeled in a similar way that is used for models of the
human mouth. Fletcher considers the mouth as a short tube, with varying cross-sectional
area controlled by raising and lowering of the tongue.
For the beak Fletcher provides a simplified conical model. The main motivation in this
model is that it can be solved analytically
+

, - 	/.   
32
 1/0 ,   0#, 0#,32
 &0 *  (11)
where
 4 ,and 	/. is cross-sectional area of peak base. 0is end correction based
on measurements with a light sheet-metal beak model and it is given by terms of length
of the peak , frequency  and tip gape , as
10
0  ??
 ??  
,, (12)
Mixing all elements to a network Fletcher gives the final input impedance as
 "!  ' ??  ' ??

 
+   '

 ??)
 
+ 
??

(13)
where ', ),  and + refer to input impedances of the trachea, larynx, mouth and the
beak, respectively.
5. SUMMARY
Primary sound source, namely syrinx, in birds is located in most of the species in the
junction of the bronchi and the trachea. There exists two competing theories to sound
producing mechanism in the syrinx. Classical theory profess that sound is produced by
vibrations of the tympaniform membrane. According to later theory sound is mainly
produced by two soft tissues similar to human vocal folds. Diversity in structure of the
syrinx is large and it is possible that either theory holds for some species. The vocal tract
consist of the trachea, larynx mouth and beak. The function of the vocal tract is as a
transfer channel and a resonator tube to the open air.
Spectrum of different sounds birds can produce is large. Sounds fluctuate from pure
tonal sounds to noisy sounds. Modulations in amplitude and frequency are common. Bird
sounds can be divided into two groups, songs and calls, with different function. Songs
are produced mainly by males in the breeding season and main functions of songs are to
attract females and to compete with other males. Calls are produced by both sexes through
the whole year. Calls occur always in some particular context with some function.
Models of bird sound producing mechanism are usually reproduced models from human
or instrument models. Generally two models are used to model sound production
in syrinx. In context of classical theory on sound production a membrane model is used.
Recent studies models sound production in syrinx with two mass model. Main parts of
the vocal tract excluding the beak are modeled as a tube resonator. For beak simplified
analytical model have been used.
6. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, S. E., Dave, A. S. & Margoliash, D. (1996), ‘Template-based automatic
recognition of birdsong syllables from continuous recordings’, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
100(2), 1209–1219.
Beckers, G. J. L., Suthers, R. A. & ten Cate, C. (2003), ‘Mechanisms of frequency and
amplitude modulation in ring dove song’, The Journal of Experimental Biology
206(11), 1833–1843.
Beddard, F. E. (1898), The Structure and Classification of Birds, Longmans, Green, London.
Brackenbury, J. H. (1989), Functions of the syrinx and the control of sound production,
in ‘(King & McLelland 1989)’, chapter 4, pp. 193–220.
11
Brittan-Powell, E. F., Dooling, R. J., Larsen, O. N. & Heaton, J. T. (1997), ‘Mechanism
of vocal production in budgerigars (melopsittacus undulatus)’, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
101(1), 578–589.
Casey, R. M. & Gaunt, A. S. (1985), ‘Theoretical models of the avian syrinx’, J. theor.
Biol. 116, 45–64.
Catchpole, C. K. & Slater, P. J. B. (1995), Bird Song: Biological Themes and Variations,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Doya, K. & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995), A novel reinforcement model of birdsong vocalization
learning, in G. Tesauro, D. Touretzky & T. Leen, eds, ‘Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems’, Vol. 7, The MIT Press, pp. 101–108.
Fee, M. S., Shraiman, B., Pesaran, B. & Mitra, P. P. (1998), ‘The role of nonlinear dynamics
of the syrinx in the vocalizations of a songbird’, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 95, 67–71.
Fletcher, N. H. (1988), ‘Bird song - a quantitative acoustic model’, J. theor. Biol 135, 455–
481.
Fletcher, N. H. (1992), Acoustics Systems in Biology, Oxford U.P., New York.
Fletcher, N. H. (2000), ‘A class of chaotic bird calls’, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 108(2), 821–826.
Fletcher, N. H. & Tarnopolsky, A. (1999), ‘Acoustics of the avian vocal tract’, J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 105(1), 35–49.
Gardner, T., Gecchi, G. & Magnasco, M. (2001), ‘Simple motor gestures for birdsongs’,
Physical Review Letters.
Gaunt, A. S. (1983), ‘A hypothesis concerning the relationship of syringeal structure to
vocal abilities’, Auk 100, 853–862.
Gaunt, A. S., Gaunt, S. L. L. & Casey, R. M. (1982), ‘Syringeal mechanics reassessed:
Evidence from streptopelia’, Auk 99, 474–494.
Gaunt, A. S., Gaunt, S. L. L., Prange, H. D. &Wasser, J. S. (1987), ‘The effects of tracheal
coiling on the vocalization of cranes (aves: Gruidae)’, J. comp. Physiol. 161, 43–58.
Goller, F. & Larsen, O. N. (1997a), ‘In situ biomechanism of the syrinxand sound generation
in pingeons’, J. exp. Biol 200, 2165–2176.
Goller, F. & Larsen, O. N. (1997b), A new mechanism of sound generation in songbirds,
in ‘Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences’, Vol. 94, pp. 14787–14791.
Goller, F. & Larsen, O. N. (2002), ‘New perspectives on mechanism of sound generation
in songbirds’, J. comp. Physiol. A 188, 841–850.
Greenewalt, C. H. (1968), Bird Song: Acoustics and Physiology, Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington D.C.
Hoese, W. J., Podos, J., Boetticher, N. C. & Nowicki, S. (2000), ‘Vocal tract function in
birdsong production: Experimental manipulation of beak movemets’, J. Exp. Biol.
203, 1845–1855.
12
Kahrs, M. & Avanzini, F. (2001), Computer synthesis of bird songs and calls, in ‘Proceedings
of the COST-G6 Conference on Digital Audio Effects (DAFx01)’, Limerick,
Ireland, pp. 23–27.
King, A. S. (1989), Functional analysis of the syrinx, in ‘(King & McLelland 1989)’,
chapter 3, pp. 105–192.
King, A. S. & McLelland, J., eds (1989), Form and Function in Birds, Vol. 4, Academic
Press.
Krebs, J. R. & Kroodsma, D. E. (1980), ‘Repertoires and geographical variation in bird
song’, Adv. Study Behav. 11, 143–177.
Laje, R., Gardner, T. J. & Mindlin, G. B. (2002), ‘Neuromuscular control of vocalization
in birdsong: A model’, Physical Review E 65, 051921.
Larsen, O. N. & Goller, F. (1999), ‘Role of syringeal vibrations in bird vocalisations’,
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.B 266, 1609–1615.
Mace, R. (1987), ‘The dawn chorus in the great tit paras major is directly related to female
fertility’, Nature 333, 123–132.
McLelland, J. (1989), Larynx and trachea, in ‘(King & McLelland 1989)’, chapter 2,
pp. 69–103.
Müller, J. P. (1878), On certain variations in the vocal organs of the Passeres that have
hitherto escaped notice, London: Macmillan.
Nowicki, S. (1987), ‘Vocal tract reconances in oscine bird sound production: Evidence
from birdsongs in a helium atmosphere’, Nature 325(6099), 53–55.
Nowicki, S. (1997), Bird acoustics, in M. J. Crocker, ed., ‘Encyclopedia of Acoustics’,
John Wiley & Sons, chapter 150, pp. 1813–1817.
Patterson, D. K. & Pepperberg, I. M. (1994), ‘A comparative study of human and parrot
phonation: Acoustic and articulatory correlates of vowels’, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 96(2,
Pt.1), 634–648.
Smyth, T. & Smith, J. O. (2002), The syrinx: nature’s hybrid wind instrument, in ‘CDROM
Paper Collection, Cancun, Mexico, Pan-America/Iberian Meeting on Acoustics’.
Suthers, R. A. (1990), ‘Contributions to birdsong from the left and right sides of the intact
syrinx’, Nature 347(6292), 473–477.
Westneat, M. W., Long, J. H., Hoese, W. J. & Nowicki, S. (1993), ‘Kinematics of birdsong:
Functional correlation of cranical movements and acoustic features in sparrows’,
J. exp. Biol 182, 147–171.
13